Skip to main content
Skip to navigation
Skip to navigation
Support the Guardian
Fund the free press with $5 per month
Support us
Print subscriptions
Newsletters
Sign in
US
The Guardian - Back to home
The Guardian
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more
World
Europe
US news
Americas
Asia
Australia
Middle East
Africa
Inequality
Global development
Xiomara Castro de Zelaya addresses supporters in Tegucigalpa before the Honduran elections. Photograph: Orlando Sierra/AFP/Getty Images
Honduras
 This article is more than 12 years old
Honduras elections: leftist party challenges right's grip on power
This article is more than 12 years old
Libre emerged from post-coup resistance movement and could give Honduras its first female, left-leaning president
Nina Lakhani in Tegucigalpa
Fri 22 Nov 2013 10.20 EST
Share
47
Prefer the Guardian on Google

Days before Hondurans go to the polls in the country's most eagerly anticipated elections in decades, a group of young people wearing red and white T-shirts are busy handing out stickers and voting information to passers-by in the rowdy main square of the capital, Tegucigalpa.

Red and white are the colours of the Freedom and Refoundation party, known by its Spanish acronym Libre, and the young people are part of an army of activists who have changed the political landscape in Honduras since 2009.

"Libre is the only party interested in opportunities for young people like me who don't have connections or can't pay their way into a new job," said Melissa Mendoza Valladores, 21, a business studies graduate. "This could finally be our chance – an opportunity for ordinary people like me."

Four years after a coup deposed the democratically elected Liberal president, Manuel Zelaya, his wife, Xiomara Castro de Zelaya, the Libre candidate, has a real chance of being elected as the country's first left-leaning president.

Sunday's vote to elect the president, congress and local governments will be the first time Hondurans have been offered a genuine alternative to the rightwing National party and centre-right Liberals, which – apart from a few periods of military rule – have rotated power for the past century.

Libre emerged from a post-coup political resistance movement, bringing together an eclectic mix of trade union and LGBT activists, human rights defenders, campesino and indigenous organisations, youth and feminist groups, teachers and intellectuals, former Liberals who opposed the coup and many others mobilised in an unprecedented grassroots base.

Neither Zelaya, who spent months holed up in the Brazilian embassy and was later exiled in the Dominican Republic, nor his many enemies could have foreseen this most unlikely transformation.

Carlos Diaz, a professor of pedagogy and a Libre activist, told the Guardian: "In 33 years of working for social change in Honduras, this is the first time we have a party which truly represents every part of society, something I never imagined possible. No matter what happens on Sunday we have succeeded in mobilising communities long abandoned or disaffected by Honduran mainstream politics."

Pro-Castro signs in Tegucigalpa. Photograph: Orlando Sierra/AFP/Getty Images

Without the financial support enjoyed by the two traditional parties, Libre has organised simply and methodically from neighbourhood to neighbourhood over the past three years.

It has promised a new constitution to make powerful, politically aligned institutions such as the national congress and judiciary (which both orchestrated the military coup) more democratic and accountable to the public rather than just to foreign investors and the country's 10 richest families, which have dominated Honduran politics for the past century.

Libre has also promised to renegotiate the terms of foreign contracts and international debt repayments, and work to rehabilitate street gangs.

There is undoubtedly a radical socialist element within its ranks, but despite rightwing scaremongering that Castro de Zelaya is a new Hugo Chávez, Libre is also explicitly pro-business and US friendly.

For many months Castro de Zelaya was ahead in the polls, followed closely by Salvador Nasralla, an ultra-conservative sports broadcaster and political novice running for his new Anti-Corruption party.

But the man to watch is the National party's neo-liberal candidate, Juan Orlando Hernández, who has proved himself to be politically adept in the role of president of the national congress since 2010, when his party won controversial and violent elections that were boycotted by many.

Juan Orlando Hernández, the National party's presidential candidate. Photograph: Gustavo Amador/EPA

After the coup, Honduras – already struggling with extreme levels of violence – descended into a vortex of criminality: by 2011, it had become the most violent country in the world outside of a warzone, with 91.6 murders per 100,000 people in 2011, a 59% increase in three years, according to the UN Office on Drugs and Crime.

International drug cartels – which hugely expanded during the post-coup chaos – street gangs, corrupt private and state security forces working with organised criminals and private businesses have all played a role in the violence, making insecurity the top issue for many voters.

Orlando Hernández's campaign promise of a "soldier on every corner" is supported by many ordinary people: the military is undoubtedly more trusted by most Hondurans than the civil police, whose leader, Juan Carlos "El Tigre" Bonilla, has been accused of leading death squads.

But according to Amnesty International and local human rights groups, the military carried out abuses with impunity in the aftermath of the coup. Karen Spring, of the NGO Rights Action, said: "Honduras has been a dream for multinational corporations since the coup as the illegitimate government hammered through laws to favour international investors in tourism, mining, dams and model cities, while communities trying to protect their land have been criminalised and militarised."

Honduras is one of the poorest countries in the Americas with 60% of its eight million people living in poverty. In the two years after the coup Honduras saw the most rapid rise in inequality in Latin America, research by the Washington-based Centre for Economic and Policy Research revealed this month.

Rights Action has documented the murders of at least 18 Libre candidates and activists since May last year, more than those of all other parties combined. At least 67 lawyers and 30 journalists have been killed since 2009.

In Tegucigalpa, National party billboards and fancy flags dominate the streets. The newspapers, many of which promoted the coup, overwhelmingly support Orlando Hernández while often criticising Libre as a party backed by foreign agitators.

Reynerio Adalid Fuentes, a taxi driver, is among the million or so independent voters who are likely to decide the outcome. "Honduras needs security and continuity in order to attract foreign companies and develop, that's why I am voting for the National party," he said. "I want our police and army on the streets to deal with the delinquency."

None of the candidates looks likely to win a large majority. On Sunday evening, Hondurans could have their first female, left-leaning president, but without a majority in congress she may face a powerful National-Liberal alliance intent on preserving the status quo.

Explore more on these topics
Honduras
Americas
news
Share
Reuse this content
Most viewed
Nothing says the ‘special relationship’ is over like this picture of Donald Trump and Liz Truss
Zoe Williams
Anderson Cooper to leave 60 Minutes amid turmoil at CBS News
Epstein ranch in New Mexico bought by family of ‘Trump Republican’ candidate
Six Sarah Ferguson-linked companies to close after Epstein revelations
Republicans and Democrats unite to condemn Trump’s attacks on allies
Comments (…)
Sign in or create your Guardian account to join the discussion
Most viewed
World
Europe
US news
Americas
Asia
Australia
Middle East
Africa
Inequality
Global development
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
Contact us
Tip us off
SecureDrop
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Tax strategy
Terms & conditions
All topics
All writers
Newsletters
Digital newspaper archive
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Threads
TikTok
YouTube
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Work with us
Accessibility settings
 
Back to top
© 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)