24/7 Live
37°
POLITICS
US Catholic cardinals urge Trump administration to embrace a moral compass in foreign policy
ByNicole Winfield and Giovanna Dell'Orto 
Monday, January 19, 2026
Stream New York's #1 news - AccuWeather - original content 24/7

ROME -- Three U.S. Catholic cardinals urged the Trump administration on Monday to use a moral compass in pursuing its foreign policy, saying U.S. military action in Venezuela, threats of acquiring Greenland and cuts in foreign aid risk bringing vast suffering instead of promoting peace.

In a joint statement, Cardinals Blase Cupich of Chicago, Robert McElroy of Washington and Joseph Tobin of Newark, N.J., warned that without a moral vision, the current debate over Washington's foreign policy was mired in "polarization, partisanship, and narrow economic and social interests."

"Most of the United States and the world are adrift morally in terms of foreign policy," McElroy told The Associated Press. "I still believe the United States has a tremendous impact upon the world."

The statement was unusual and marked the second time in as many months that members of the U.S. Catholic hierarchy have asserted their voice against a Trump administration many believe isn't upholding the basic tenets of human dignity. In November, the entire U.S. conference of Catholic bishops condemned the administration's mass deportation of migrants and "vilification" of them in the public discourse.

The three cardinals, who are prominent figures in the more progressive wing of the U.S. church, took as a starting point a major foreign policy address that Pope Leo XIV delivered Jan. 9 to ambassadors accredited to the Holy See.

The speech, delivered almost entirely in English, amounted to Leo's most substantial critique of U.S. foreign policy. History's first U.S.-born pope denounced how nations were using force to assert their dominion worldwide, "completely undermining" peace and the post-World War II international legal order.

Leo didn't name individual countries, but his speech came against the backdrop of the then-recent U.S. military operation in Venezuela to remove Nicolás Maduro from power, U.S. threats to take Greenland as well as Russia's ongoing war in Ukraine.

The U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops was consulted on the statement, and its president, Archbishop Paul Coakley, "supports the emphasis placed by the cardinals on Pope Leo's teaching in these times," said spokesperson Chieko Noguchi.

The White House didn't immediately respond to the AP's request for comment on Monday.

Cardinals question the use of force

The three cardinals cited Venezuela, Greenland and Ukraine in their statement - saying they "raised basic questions about the use of military force and the meaning of peace" - as well as the cuts to foreign aid that U.S. President Donald Trump's administration initiated last year.

"Our country's moral role in confronting evil around the world, sustaining the right to life and human dignity, and supporting religious liberty are all under examination," they warned.

"We renounce war as an instrument for narrow national interests and proclaim that military action must be seen only as a last resort in extreme situations, not a normal instrument of national policy," they wrote. "We seek a foreign policy that respects and advances the right to human life, religious liberty, and the enhancement of human dignity throughout the world, especially through economic assistance."

Tobin described the moral compass the cardinals wish the U.S. would use globally.

"It can't be that my prosperity is predicated on inhuman treatment of others," he told the AP. "The real argument isn't just my right or individual rights, but what is the common good."

Cardinals expand on their statement in interviews with AP

In interviews, Cupich and McElroy said the signatories were inspired to issue a statement after hearing from several fellow cardinals during a Jan. 7-8 meeting at the Vatican. These other cardinals expressed alarm about the U.S. action in Venezuela, its cuts in foreign aid and its threats to acquire Greenland, Cupich said.

A day later, Leo's nearly 45-minute-long speech to the diplomatic corps gave the Americans the language they needed, allowing them to "piggyback on" the pope's words, Cupich said.

Cupich acknowledged that Maduro's prosecution could be seen positively, but not the way it was done via a U.S. military incursion into a sovereign country.

"When we go ahead and do it in such a way that is portrayed as saying, 'Because we can do it, we're going to do it, that might makes right' - that's a troublesome development," he said. "There's the rule of law that should be followed."

Trump has insisted that capturing Maduro was legal. On Greenland, Trump has argued repeatedly that the U.S. needs control of the resource-rich island, a semiautonomous region of NATO ally Denmark. for its national security.

The Trump administration last year significantly gutted the U.S. Agency for International Development, saying its projects advance a liberal agenda and were a waste of money.

Tobin, who ministered in more than 70 countries as a Redemptorist priest and the order's superior general, lamented the retreat in USAID assistance, saying U.S. philanthropy makes a big difference in everything from hunger to health.

The three cardinals said their key aim wasn't to criticize the administration, but rather to encourage the U.S. to regain is moral standing in the world by pursuing a foreign policy that is ethically guided and seeks the common good.

"We're not endorsing a political party or a political movement," Tobin said. The faithful in the pews and all people of good will have a role to play, he said.

"They can make an argument of basic human decency," he said.

___

Dell'Orto reported from Minneapolis.

___

Associated Press religion coverage receives support through the AP's collaboration with The Conversation US, with funding from Lilly Endowment Inc. The AP is solely responsible for this content.

Report a correction or typo
Copyright © 2026 by The Associated Press. All Rights Reserved.
Related Topics
POLITICS
NEWARK
NEW JERSEY
CATHOLIC CHURCH
DONALD TRUMP
VENEZUELA
If you have a mouse, this game will keep you up all night. No Install. Play for free.
Navy Quest
|
Sponsored
0% APR for Up to 21 Months = No Credit Card Interest Until Nearly 2028
CardCritics/Sponsored
Learn More
Why I Switched From Ambien To This [See how]
LifeMD/Sponsored
Learn More
Renew Your Passport From Home — Here's How.
GovPlus/Sponsored
Learn More
Limited-Time: 3 Credit Cards Now Charging 0% Interest Until Nearly 2028
CardCritics/Sponsored
Learn More
1 Bedroom Apartment For Seniors - Take A Look
Freshsearches | 1 Bedroom Senior Living/Sponsored
Crack an Egg Yolk in Your Kitchen Sink Every Night, Here’s Why
Life Hacks Place/Sponsored
Why People in Lancaster Are Quitting Ambien for This Sleep Aid
LifeMD/Sponsored
Learn More
Researchers Discover a New Side Effect of the Shingles Vaccine
GoodRx/Sponsored
Learn More
Search for affordable quick denture services seniors
Yahoo Search | Affordable dentures/Sponsored
Watch Live
ON NOW
Top Stories
Person pulled to safety following rescue on Queensboro Bridge: FDNY
44 minutes ago
Several people rescued from raging house fire
38 minutes ago
2 killed, 3 hurt in 'targeted' shooting at RI ice rink: officials
1 hour ago
MTA opens new front in war on LIRR fare evasion
Family of woman attacked at subway station says she is traumatized
Topics
Home
Weather
Traffic
7 On Your Side
7 on Your Side Investigates
Localish
Shop
Watch ABC 7 New York
Apps
Regions
New York City
New Jersey
Long Island
Northern Suburbs
Connecticut
More Content
New York Lottery
Neighborhood Safety Tracker
US & World News
Politics
Health
Sports
Our America
On The Red Carpet
Podcasts
abc7NY En Español
Station Info
Submit a News Tip
Employment
Meet the Eyewitness News Team
ABC 7 In Your Community
About ABC 7
Accessibility
Contests and Rules
Privacy Policy
Your Privacy Choices
Children's Privacy Policy
Your US State Privacy Rights
Terms of Use
Interest-Based Ads
Public Inspection File
FCC Applications
Copyright © 2026 ABC, Inc., WABC-TV New York. All Rights Reserved.