Skip to main content
Advertisement
MENU
EUROPE
LOG IN
POLITICO PRO
Home
Latest news
Greenland
Munich Security Conference
War in Ukraine
Newsletters
Podcasts
Poll of Polls
Policy news
Events
NEWS
DEFENSE
Denmark sends more troops to Greenland

Denmark says its troops could stay in Greenland for one to two years.

LISTEN
COPY LINK
A "substantial contribution" of Danish combat soldiers is expected to arrive in Kangerlussuaq, the location of Greenland’s main international airport, on Monday evening, according to Danish broadcaster TV2. | Mads Claus Rasmussen/EPA
JANUARY 19, 2026 4:37 PM CET
BY JACOPO BARIGAZZI AND VICTOR JACK

With Donald Trump continuing to ramp up pressure in his bid to annex Greenland, Denmark on Monday is boosting its military presence on the Arctic island, according to local press reports.

A "substantial contribution" of Danish combat soldiers is expected to arrive in Kangerlussuaq, the location of Greenland’s main international airport, on Monday evening, according to Danish broadcaster TV2.

Denmark’s top military commander in the Arctic, Maj. Gen. Søren Andersen, said that about 100 Danish soldiers have already arrived in Nuuk, Greenland's capital, and a similar number in Kangerlussuaq, in western Greenland. The soldiers are due to take part in the Arctic Endurance training exercise. Andersen said last week that the deployment is a response to Russian threats and not to Trump.

Advertisement
Advertisement

Copenhagen on Monday asked for a NATO mission to Greenland, Danish Defense Minister Troels Lund Poulsen said, after a meeting with alliance chief Mark Rutte at NATO headquarters in Brussels. "We have proposed that, and NATO's secretary-general has also noted that," he told reporters.

Lund Poulsen slammed Trump's threats against Greenland as "really, really hurtful," but warned the alliance still can't afford to sever ties with Washington.

"If the Americans withdraw from NATO tomorrow, we will have a huge challenge in fending for ourselves," he said, adding: "it also gives us reason to do more on the European side."

The additional troops being sent to Greenland won't be going home anytime soon.

“We will continue the mission for a year, maybe two, with the cooperation of foreign soldiers. We are trying to establish a schedule for deploying troops to Greenland in 2026 and the following year, so yes, it is a long-term mission," Andersen told Le Monde.

In the past days, the European military officers participated to a reconnaissance mission and “assessed training opportunities throughout the year and are planning to return in March with different capabilities,” Andersen said.

Advertisement
Advertisement

The deployments came amid intensifying pressure from Trump, who wants to annex the Arctic island, a semi-autonomous territory within the Kingdom of Denmark. He has not ruled out using military force to do so.

Trump denounced the move by allied countries, warning: "These Countries, who are playing this very dangerous game, have put a level of risk in play that is not tenable or sustainable."

Trump argues that Denmark hasn't done enough to protect Greenland from a possible attack from Russia or China, joking that Copenhagen only has two dog sleds to defend the island. In reality, Denmark said last year it would boost defense spending for Greenland by 27.4 billion krone (€3.7 billion) for naval vessels, patrol aircraft, drones and surveillance radars.

Despite Trump's contention that Chinese and Russian vessels are "all over the place" near Greenland, there is no evidence that is the case.

Denmark announced last week it was boosting its presence on Greenland and that the exercise could include guarding critical infrastructure, providing assistance to local authorities, receiving allied troops, deploying fighter aircraft in and around Greenland and conducting naval operations. 

Laura Kayali contributed reporting.

This article has been updated.

Advertisement
Advertisement
 Related Tags
EU-US military ties
European Defense
 Related Countries
Denmark
Greenland
United States
 Related People
Donald Trump
Our readers read next
Berlin urges Paris to boost defense spending by cutting other costs
15 HRS AGO  3 MINS READ
Europe edges toward a multi-speed future
22 HRS AGO  1 MIN READ
US and Europe need each other, but trust is gone
FEB 15  7 MINS READ
Poland should ‘begin work’ on nuclear defenses, Nawrocki says
FEB 15  1 MIN READ
More from Jacopo Barigazzi
Meloni says she disagrees with Merz on culture wars

Italian prime minister was a notable absence from the Munich Security Conference.

FEB 15  2 MINS READ
As NATO concerns persist, von der Leyen urges EU to fortify defense clause

“Mutual defense is not optional for the EU,” warns European Commission president.

FEB 14  3 MINS READ
EU defense chief lays out ideas for a European military force to replace US troops

‘What we are talking about is a rapid reaction force of 100,000 or 80,000 capability, which should replace American forces,’ says EU defense commissioner.

FEB 13  3 MINS READ
Europe has the weapons, but needs US to wage war

European countries rely on the the U.S. for intelligence, logistics, communications and command-and-control.

FEB 12  7 MINS READ
Facebook
Twitter
YouTube
App Store
Play Store
POLICY
Agriculture and Food
Central Banker
Competition and Industrial Policy
Cybersecurity and Data Protection
Defense
Energy and Climate
Energy and Climate UK
Energie et Climat France
Financial Services
Financial Services UK
Health Care
Industrie & Handel
Mobility
Paris Influence
Sustainability
Technology
Tech France
Technology UK
Trade
Trade UK
NEWSLETTERS
Berlin Bulletin
Berlin Playbook
Brussels Playbook
Dimanchissime
EU Influence
Global Playbook
Global Policy Lab: Living Cities
Global Security
London Influence
London Playbook
Le Weekly
Playbook Paris
POLITICO Confidential
Sunday Crunch
PODCASTS
Brussels Playbook Podcast
Westminster Insider
Politics at Sam and Anne's
Berlin Playbook — Der Podcast
OPINION
All Opinion
Beyond the Bubble
Germany Interpreted
Declassified
From Across the Pond
Unpacked
FEATURED SERIES
Danish Presidency of the EU
Europe’s looming water crisis
Polish Presidency of the EU
A global emergency: Tackling antimicrobial resistance
Living Cities
POLITICO 28
SUBSCRIPTIONS
POLITICO Pro
Print Edition
Research and analysis division
EDITIONS
POLITICO Europe
POLITICO UK
POLITICO France
POLITICO Germany
POLITICO US
Manage Privacy Settings
About us
Contact us
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Media Solutions
Research and Analysis Division
Agency IQ
Press
Print Edition
Careers at POLITICO
Ts&Cs
FAQs