Search
Home
Latest
Fortune 500
Finance
Tech
Leadership
Lifestyle
Rankings
Multimedia
POLITICS
DONALD TRUMP
Trump wants nations to pay $1 billion to stay on his peace board
By Bloomberg
January 17, 2026, 5:29 PM ET
Add us on
President Donald Trump speaks during the United Nations General Assembly on September 23, 2025 in New York City.
MICHAEL M. SANTIAGO/GETTY IMAGES

The Trump administration is asking countries that want a permanent spot on his new Board of Peace to contribute at least $1 billion.

According to a draft charter for the proposed group seen by Bloomberg, President Donald Trump would serve as its inaugural chairman and would decide on who is invited to be members. Decisions would be taken by a majority, with each member state present getting one vote, but all would be subject to the chairman’s approval.

“Each Member State shall serve a term of no more than three years from this Charter’s entry into force, subject to renewal by the Chairman. The three-year membership term shall not apply to Member States that contribute more than USD $1,000,000,000 in cash funds to the Board of Peace within the first year of the Charter’s entry into force,” the draft says.

Critics are worried that Trump is trying to build an alternative, or rival, to the United Nations, which he has long criticized.

The board is described in the charter as “an international organization that seeks to promote stability, restore dependable and lawful governance, and secure enduring peace in areas affected or threatened by conflict.” It would become official once three member states agree to the charter.

Trump would also be responsible for approving the group’s official seal, the document says.

Trump has invited a number of world leaders, including Argentina’s Javier Milei and Canada’s Mark Carney, to be part of a Board of Peace for Gaza, which would be formed under the broader umbrella of his new Board of Peace.

That plan attracted swift criticism from Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, who said the details hadn’t been coordinated with his country.

Read More: Gaza ‘Board of Peace’ Takes Shape as Israel Raises Concern

Several European nations have been invited to join the peace board, according to people familiar with the matter. The draft appears to suggest Trump himself would control the money, something that would be considered unacceptable to most countries who could have potentially joined the board, said the people, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss private matters.

Several nations strongly oppose the draft of Trump’s charter and are working on collectively pushing back against the proposals, the people added.

A US official confirmed to Bloomberg News that while members would be able to join for free, the $1 billion fee would grant permanent membership. The money raised will be used directly to accomplish the Board of Peace’s mandate to rebuild Gaza, said the official who spoke on condition of anonymity. The board will ensure almost every dollar raised is used to execute its mandate, the official added.

The Board of Peace would convene voting meetings at least annually and “at such additional times and locations as the Chairman deems appropriate,” the draft charter says. The agenda would be subject to approval by the chairman. The peace board would hold regular non-voting meetings with its executive board. Such meetings would be convened on at least a quarterly basis.

Read More: Trump Pulls US From 31 Bodies in UN, Already in Fiscal Peril

Trump would also have the power to remove a member, subject to a veto by a two-thirds majority of member states. “The Chairman shall at all times designate a successor for the role of Chairman,” the charter says.

On Friday, the White House announced a first executive panel that would include Secretary of State Marco Rubio, Middle East envoy Steve Witkoff, Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner and former UK Prime Minister Tony Blair before the formation of the overall board.

Join us at the Fortune Workplace Innovation Summit May 19–20, 2026, in Atlanta. The next era of workplace innovation is here—and the old playbook is being rewritten. At this exclusive, high-energy event, the world’s most innovative leaders will convene to explore how AI, humanity, and strategy converge to redefine, again, the future of work. Register now.
About the Author
By 
Bloomberg
See full bio
Latest in Politics
POLITICS
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN
Democrats and the Trump administration dig in over DHS oversight, offering no signs of a deal to end the partial government shutdown
By Aamer Madhani and The Associated Press
February 15, 2026
1 day ago
POLITICS
ICE
Trump’s border czar says ‘small’ security force will remain in Minnesota after enforcement drawdown. ‘We’ll get back to the original footprint’
By Ben Finley and The Associated Press
February 15, 2026
1 day ago
POLITICS
NATO
U.S. literally can’t afford to lose superpower status as debt looms—so we’re stuck in an ‘increasingly loveless’ marriage with Europe, analyst says
By Jason Ma
February 15, 2026
1 day ago
ENERGY
OIL
U.S. military tracks down a sanctioned oil tanker from the Caribbean to the Indian Ocean and ‘shut it down’
By Ben Finley and The Associated Press
February 15, 2026
2 days ago
MIDDLE EAST
IRAN
The U.S. and Iran will hold a new round of nuclear talks as Trump sends the world’s largest aircraft carrier to the Mideast
By The Associated Press
February 15, 2026
2 days ago
EUROPE
EUROPE
EU foreign policy chief pushes back on U.S. claims that ‘woke, decadent Europe’ is heading toward ‘civilizational erasure’
By Emma Burrows, Geir Moulson and The Associated Press
February 15, 2026
2 days ago
Most Popular
ECONOMY
Social Security's trust fund is nearing insolvency, and the borrowing binge that may follow will rip through debt markets, economist warns
By Jason Ma
February 15, 2026
1 day ago
FUTURE OF WORK
Malcolm Gladwell tells young people if they want a STEM degree, 'don’t go to Harvard.' You may end up at the bottom of your class and drop out
By Sasha Rogelberg
February 14, 2026
3 days ago
REAL ESTATE
A billionaire and an A-list actor found refuge in a 37-home Florida neighborhood with armed guards—proof that privacy is now the ultimate luxury
By Marco Quiroz-Gutierrez
February 15, 2026
2 days ago
SUCCESS
Meet the grandmother living out of a 400-ft ‘granny pod’ to save money and help with child care—it’s become an American ‘economic necessity’
By Emma Burleigh
February 15, 2026
2 days ago
ECONOMY
A U.S. 'debt spiral' could start soon as the interest rate on government borrowing is poised to exceed economic growth, budget watchdog says
By Jason Ma
February 14, 2026
2 days ago
COMMENTARY
Something big is happening in AI — and most people will be blindsided
By Matt Shumer
February 11, 2026
6 days ago
Rankings
100 Best Companies
Fortune 500
Global 500
Fortune 500 Europe
Most Powerful Women
Future 50
World’s Most Admired Companies
See All Rankings
Sections
Finance
Leadership
Success
Tech
Asia
Europe
Environment
Fortune Crypto
Health
Retail
Lifestyle
Politics
Newsletters
Magazine
Features
Commentary
Mpw
CEO Initiative
Conferences
Personal Finance
Education
Customer Support
Frequently Asked Questions
Customer Service Portal
Privacy Policy
Terms Of Use
Single Issues For Purchase
International Print
Commercial Services
Advertising
Fortune Brand Studio
Fortune Analytics
Fortune Conferences
Business Development
About Us
About Us
Editorial Calendar
Press Center
Work At Fortune
Diversity And Inclusion
Terms And Conditions
Site Map

© 2026 Fortune Media IP Limited. All Rights Reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy | CA Notice at Collection and Privacy Notice | Do Not Sell/Share My Personal Information
FORTUNE is a trademark of Fortune Media IP Limited, registered in the U.S. and other countries. FORTUNE may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice.