SKIP TO MAIN CONTENT
SUPPORT US
IRAN
MIDTERMS
JUSTICE
WAR ON GAZA
UNMASKING ICE
CHILLING DISSENT
SUPPORT US 
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIONS
VOICES
PODCASTS
PRESS FREEDOM DEFENSE FUND
JOIN THE NEWSLETTER
ABOUT
CONTACT US
MORE WAYS TO DONATE
IMPACT & REPORTS
JOBS
BECOME A SOURCE

© THE INTERCEPT

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

TERMS OF USE
PRIVACY
IRAN
MIDTERMS
JUSTICE
WAR ON GAZA
UNMASKING ICE
CHILLING DISSENT
ABOUT
SUPPORT US
DOCUMENTS SHOW AMAZON IS AWARE DRIVERS PEE IN BOTTLES AND EVEN DEFECATE EN ROUTE, DESPITE COMPANY DENIAL

If employees actually had to pee in bottles, Amazon said, “nobody would work for us.” That’s a lie.

Ken Klippenstein
March 25 2021, 4:54 p.m.
Share
Photo illustration: The Intercept, Getty Images

IN ANTICIPATION OF Sen. Bernie Sanders’s scheduled trip to Bessemer, Alabama, to support the unionization drive by Amazon workers there, Amazon executive Dave Clark cast the $1 trillion behemoth as “the Bernie Sanders of employers” and taunted: “So if you want to hear about $15 an hour and health care, Senator Sanders will be speaking downtown. But if you would like to make at least $15 an hour and have good health care, Amazon is hiring.”

Rep. Mark Pocan replied via tweet: “Paying workers $15/hr doesn’t make you a progressive workplace when you union-bust & make workers urinate in water bottles,” echoing reports from 2018 that Amazon workers were forced to skip bathroom breaks and pee in bottles. Amazon’s denial was swift: “You don’t really believe the peeing in bottles thing, do you? If that were true, nobody would work for us.”

But Amazon workers with whom I spoke said that the practice was so widespread due to pressure to meet quotas that managers frequently referenced it during meetings and in formal policy documents and emails, which were provided to The Intercept. The practice, these documents show, was known to management, which identified it as a recurring infraction but did nothing to ease the pressure that caused it. In some cases, employees even defecated in bags.

Amazon did not provide a statement to The Intercept before publication.

One document from January, marked “Amazon Confidential,” details various infractions by Amazon employees, including “public urination” and “public defecation.” The document was provided to The Intercept by an Amazon employee in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, who, like most of the employees I talked to, was granted anonymity to avoid professional reprisal.

The employee also provided an email sent by an Amazon logistics area manager last May that chastised employees for defecating into bags. “This evening, an associate discovered human feces in an Amazon bag that was returned to station by a driver. This is the 3rd occasion in the last 2 months when bags have been returned to station with poop inside. We understand that DA’s [driver associates] may have emergencies while on-road, and especially during Covid, DAs have struggled to find bathrooms while delivering.”

“We’ve noticed an uptick recently of all kinds of unsanitary garbage being left inside bags: used masks, gloves, bottles of urine,” the email continues. “By scanning the QR code on the bag, we can easily identify the DA who was in possession of the bag last. These behaviors are unacceptable, and will result in Tier 1 Infractions going forward. Please communicate this message to your drivers. I know if may seem obvious, or like something you shouldn’t need to coach, but please be explicit when communicating the message that they CANNOT poop, or leave bottles of urine inside bags.”


An email sent by an Amazon logistics area manager in May 2020.

 Obtained by The Intercept
Halie Marie Brown, a 26-year-old resident of Manteca, California, who worked as a delivery driver for an Amazon delivery contractor, Soon Express, until quitting on March 12, told The Intercept that the practice “happens because we are literally implicitly forced to do so, otherwise we will end up losing our jobs for too many ‘undelivered packages.’”

An email that Brown received from her manager this past August has a section titled “Urine bottle” and states: “In the morning, you must check your van thoroughly for garbage and urine bottle. If you find urine bottle (s) please report to your lead, supporting staff or me. Vans will be inspected by Amazon during debrief, if urine bottle (s) are found, you will be issue an infraction tier 1 for immediate offboarding.”

While Amazon technically prohibits the practice — documents characterize it as a “Tier 1” infraction, which employees say can lead to termination — drivers said that this was disingenuous since they can’t meet their quotas otherwise. “They give us 30 minutes of paid breaks, but you will not finish your work if you take it, no matter how fast you are,” one Amazon delivery employee based in Massachusetts told me.

Asked if management eased up on the quotas in light of the practice, Brown said, “Not at all. In fact, over the course of my time there, our package and stop counts actually increased substantially.”

This has gotten even more intense, employees say, as Amazon has seen an enormous boom in package orders during the coronavirus pandemic. Amazon employees said their performance is monitored so closely by the firm’s vast employee surveillance arsenal that they are constantly in fear of falling short of their productivity quotas.

One email, provided to The Intercept by a Houston-based driver associate who works for an Amazon contractor, alludes to company cameras that can find workers who leave urine bottles behind in the vans. “Data from these cameras can be sent to Amazon in the event of any incident on the road. (We have had several bad accidents, a stolen van, drivers leaving piss bottles etc in the vans).”

The employee said, “Every single day of my shift, I have to use the restroom in a bottle to finish my route on time. This is so common that you’ll often find bottles from other drivers located under seats in the vans. … The fact that Amazon would tweet that is hilarious.”

Related
Some Younger Amazon Workers in Bessemer, New to Unions, Are Still Undecided

Public reports that Amazon employees skipped bathroom breaks originated in a 2018 book by the British journalist James Bloodworth. That book, “Hired: Six Months Undercover in Low-Wage Britain,” alleged that Amazon workers at a warehouse in Staffordshire, U.K., resorted to urinating in bottles in order to meet production quotas. While most of the employees I spoke to were drivers who delivered products, workers said the practice was commonplace in factories as well.

The vote by Amazon warehouse workers in Alabama on whether to unionize has become a flashpoint for organized labor. While Amazon has publicly criticized Sanders, he is far from the only prominent politician to voice support for the employees’ right to form a union. Last month, President Joe Biden released a video statement saying, “Every worker should have a free and fair choice to join a union,” which “should be made without intimidation or threats by employers.”

The election, which ends on March 29, would determine if the more than 5,000 warehouse workers will join the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union. None of Amazon’s 800,000 employees in the U.S. are currently unionized.

Share

I’M BEN MUESSIG, The Intercept’s editor-in-chief. It’s been a devastating year for journalism — the worst in modern U.S. history.

We have a president with utter contempt for truth aggressively using the government’s full powers to dismantle the free press. Corporate news outlets have cowered, becoming accessories in Trump’s project to create a post-truth America. Right-wing billionaires have pounced, buying up media organizations and rebuilding the information environment to their liking.

In this most perilous moment for democracy, The Intercept is fighting back. But to do so effectively, we need to grow.

That’s where you come in. Will you help us expand our reporting capacity in time to hit the ground running in 2026?

We’re independent of corporate interests. Will you help us?
$5
$8
$10
$15
ONE TIME
MONTHLY
Donate
CONTACT THE AUTHOR:
Ken Klippenstein
ken.klippenstein@theintercept.com
@kenklippenstein
on X
RELATED
Some Younger Amazon Workers in Bessemer, New to Unions, Are Still Undecided
Amazon Retaliated Against Chicago Workers Following Spring Covid-19 Protests, NLRB Finds
Amazon VP Abruptly Resigns From Board of Liberal Legal Organization
Former FBI Officials Tapped for Amazon’s Growing Security Apparatus
LATEST STORIES

Chilling Dissent

Armed Off-Duty Cop Tried to Incite Violence at a High School Anti-ICE Protest

Noah Hurowitz

 - 4:11 am

“My plan is legitimately to just let them all assault me and you guys arrest them all,” the Phoenix cop told fellow police after the incident.

Midterms 2026

Swift Swalwell Fallout Suggests the Democrats Have Finally Learned From Epstein

Jessica Washington

 - Apr. 14

The former representative’s rapid collapse over sexual assault allegations signals that Democrats have gotten the message: Voters see accountability for abuse as a key electoral issue.

Dem Leaders Aren’t Even Bothering to Rally Caucus Against Trump Domestic Spying Powers

Matt Sledge

 - Apr. 14

Grassroots opposition to renewing Section 702 of FISA is building, thanks in part to fears about AI used to sort Americans’ data.

JOIN THE CONVERSATION
ABOUT
SUPPORT US
JOIN NEWSLETTER
JOBS
CONTACT US
POLICIES
TERMS OF USE
PRIVACY

© THE INTERCEPT. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

Enter your email to keep reading for free.

This is not a paywall.

I'm in

By signing up, I agree to receive emails from The Intercept and to the Privacy Policy and Terms of Use.

(opens in a new tab)